CONTENT: EIC guide updates (#112)
pyOpenSci/contributing-guide: open-source-software-submissions/editor-in-chief-guide.md

# Editor in Chief Guide

## Editor in Chief (EiC) role & responsibilities

The Editor in Chief (EiC) is a rotating position that serves 
for 3 to 6 months or a time agreed to by all members of the editorial 
board. 

If the EiC needs to step down at any time before the agreed-upon 
duration of their tenure, pyOpenSci requests and appreciates 2 weeks notice
to support finding a new EiC.

### The Editor in Chief fulfills the following roles:

> - Watches all issues posted to the [software-review repository](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-review/issues) (by "watching" it on GitHub to receive notifications), and by joining the `#feed-software-review` channel on Slack).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Watches all issues posted to the [software-review repository](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-review/issues) (by "watching" it on GitHub to receive notifications, and by joining the `#feed-software-review` channel on Slack).
```

Removed an extra closing parenthesis

A few final tasks to perform here:

- Add any comments to the bottom of your editor checks comment
- Update the yaml in the header of the issue with the editor assigned to the review 
- Add the tag `2/seeking-reviewer(s)` to the issue.

### Submissions that are incomplete or vague: need more details

In some cases online documentation of a package is sparse, the README is 
minimal or hard to understand or there is no clear documentation setup. Or 
in other cases some of the YAML at the top of the issue is missing. 
This makes assessment of the package's scope much harder. 
In this case, please ask for more information. Even if the package is deemed
out-of-scope, the package documentation will improve as a result of your questions. 

Example text

```markdown
Hello <username> and many thanks for your submission.

We are discussing whether the package is in scope and need a bit more 
information.

Would you mind adding more details and context to your `README` file?
After reading it, someone with little domain knowledge should understand 
the aim, goals and functionality of the package.

<optional>
If a package has overlapping functionality with other packages, we require you 

> to mention in your documentation (README) and in this issue [how it is "best in class"](https://pyopensci.org/policies.html#overlap). Could you add a more detailed comparison to the packages you mention in the README so we can evaluate?

Reviewer: This link 404s. Should it be an internal link to this section?  
https://www.pyopensci.org/contributing-guide/open-source-software-peer-review/aims-and-scope.html?highlight=overlap#package-overlap

Author: oh you know what i just redid a lot of our policies. let me double check on that one to make sure it's correct. i did a lot of work there that might have messed up many links. I'm hoping to just use html proofer for that check in the near future as well it will just be easier.

# Editor in Chief Guide

> ## Editor in Chief role & responsibilities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Editor in Chief (EiC) role & responsibilities
```
Make it super obvious for highly distracted people (como moi) that this is the acronym we will use throughout the page?

The Editor in Chief (EiC) is a rotating position that serves 
for 3 to 6 months or a time agreed to by all members of the editorial 
board. 

If the EiC needs to step down at any time before the agreed-upon 
duration of their tenure, pyOpenSci requests and appreciates 2 weeks notice
to support finding a new EiC.

### The Editor in Chief fulfills the following roles:

> - Watches all issues posted to the software-review repo (either subscribe to repo notifications on GitHub, or watch the `#software-review-feed` channel on Slack).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Watches all issues posted to the [software-review repository](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-review/issues) (by "watching" it on GitHub to receive notifications), and by joining the `#feed-software-review` channel on Slack).
```

Reviewer: I know repeating the word "watch" is not great, but would prefer we indicate the EiC should definitely do both these things

Reviewer: Do we want to make the language here a little more broad?  Something like:

> take responsibility for handling all new issues on the software-review repository, and act as the first point of contact for all new submissions and pre-submission inquiries

And then indicate that a good way to achieve this is to watch the repo + join the relevant slack channel

> - Performs an initial set of editor checks on new package submissions (see template for these checks below)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Performs an initial set of editor checks on new package submissions (see {ref}`template <editor-checklist-template>` for these checks below)
```

- Raises scope/overlap issue with all editors if they see an ambiguous submission. 
This may also be done by handling editors if appropriate (see note below). If 
the scope of a package is in question, the EiC should post to the pyOpenSci 
Slack `software-review` channel, tagging all editors.

> - Assigns package submissions to other editors (including themselves if they have bandwidth), to handle. Assigning may be based upon domain background or just who has bandwidth to lead the review. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Assigns package submissions to other editors to handle. Assigning may be based upon domain background or just who has bandwidth to lead the review. The editor in chief can assign packages to themself for review.
```

Reviewer: Just trying to not interrupt a sentence in the middle

Author: excellent! thanks!

- Responds to pre-submission inquiries posted to the software-review repository 

> and similarly pings editors in the `software-review slack channel` if discussion 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and similarly pings editors in the `software-review` Slack channel if discussion 
```

Reviewer: (Slack channel shouldn't be in monospace)

is needed. Any editor should feel free to communicate with package authors as it 
makes sense. See [this section](#responding-to-out-of-scope-submissions) about 
how to respond to out-of-scope (pre-) submissions.
- Responds to review referrals from JOSS or other publication partners.
- Monitors pace of review process and reminds other editors to move packages along as needed.
- Requests a new EiC when their rotation is up (set a calendar reminder ahead of your expected end date and ask for volunteers in the editors’ Slack channel)

This Editor in Chief position rotates between different pyOpenSci editors. 

```{note}

> In some cases, if the EiC is unable to support a particular package due to 

Reviewer: Should this language be stronger?

Not making a suggestion since it would span several lines, but:
> If the EiC is unable to support a particular package due to a conflict of interest, they should assign an editor to perform initial checks. The Editor in Chief may also opt to assign an editor to perform checks if they believe that editor is better suited to assess the scope and readiness of a package to be reviewed

> In some cases, if the EiC is unable to support a particular package due to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some cases, if the EiC is unable to support review of a particular package due to 
```

"support package" sounds not quite right

> conflicts OR if they simple believe another editor is better suited to assess 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
conflicts OR if they simply believe another editor is better suited to assess 
```

the scope and readiness of a package to be reviewed, they may opt to assign an editor to perform initial checks.
```

## Editor in Chief checklist

When a new package is submitted for review, the EiC will:

- Tag the issue with `1/editor-checks` tag 

> - Next, they will use the template below in the issue to check whether the package has 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Next, they will use the {ref}`template <editor-checklist-template>` below in the issue to check whether the package has 
```

Author: ok moving into myST syntax here aren't we? i have been using markdown links. let's try it.

the bare minimum requirements to initiate a review (or they will assign that task to an editor as stated above). 

> - SURVEY data: To ensure we have information from the authors, please be sure that they filled out our survey. Thank them graciously for doing this. They can skip sections of it if they wish, but we do need their contact information and we do want to track their experience with out review process and organization  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Survey data: To ensure we have information from the authors, please be sure that they filled out our survey. Thank them graciously for doing this. They can skip sections of it if they wish, but we do need their contact information and we do want to track their experience with our review process and organization.  
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(editor-checklist-template)=
```

Author: so @NickleDave this is where i'm confused... in theory those headers should automagically be creating targets on the page. but you are creating a target here. this is where i'm confused with the jupyter book build and how links work. i have an discussion going on with Chris over in the executable books org about this.  Also can i safely call that target from another page?

### Editor checklist (copy template below to use in the issue)

```markdown
## Editor checks 

Hi there! Thank you for submitting your package for pyOpenSci
review. Below are the basic checks that your package needs to pass 
to begin our review. If some of these are missing, we will ask you 
to work on them before the review process begins. 

- [ ] **Fit**: The package meets criteria for [fit](https://www.pyopensci.org/contributing-guide/open-source-software-peer-review/aims-and-scope.html#package-categories) and [overlap](https://www.pyopensci.org/contributing-guide/open-source-software-peer-review/aims-and-scope.html#package-overlap).
- [ ] **Documentation** The package has sufficient documentation available online (README, sphinx docs) to allow us to evaluate package function and scope *without installing the package*. This includes:

>   - [ ] Get started vignettes or tutorials that help a user understand how to use the package and what it can do for them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [ ] tutorials or vignettes that help a user understand how to use the package and what it can do for them (often these have a name like "Getting started")
```
Should we define vignettes and/or add a link to something? I feel like this is a very rOpenSci specific term although I am definitely in favor of using it

Author: it's definitely an R specific term. thats why i added "or tutorials" as sometimes short tutorials are vignettes as well. but open to more clear language. what ros does a lot is provide examples that they like of packages with good... docs.. etc we could do that.

  - [ ] API documentation - this includes clearly written doc strings with variables defined using a standard docstring format
  - [ ] README that clearly articulates the function of the package
  - [ ] Contributing documentation that details how to install a development environment and how to contribute to the package

> - [ ] **Issue Header Information**: All of the required issue header information is contained within the top of the issue.

Reviewer: I'm not clear on what "Issue Header Information" is meant to convey. Do you mean like an issue template?

Reviewer: Or you mean "the submitter provided all the required info in this submission"?

Author: yes i mean they provided all required info... so the YAML header. we can use language that is less technical. i think about parsing a yaml header....

Author: changed it to:
**Issue Submission Documentation**: All of the information is filled out in the `YAML` header of the issue (located at the top of the issue template).

- [ ] **Automated tests:** Package has a testing suite and is tested via GitHub actions or another Continuous Integration service.

> - [ ] **License:** The package has an OSI accepted license

Reviewer: define and link to OSI?

- [ ] **Repository:** The repository link resolves correctly

> - [ ] **README:** The package has a README with clear explanation of what the packages does and instructions on how to install it along with development instructions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] **README:** The package has a README with clear explanation of what the package does and instructions on how to install it along with development instructions. 
```

- [ ] **Contributing statement:** The package has a contributing.md file that details how to contribute to the package. 
- [ ] **Package overlap:** That package doesn't fully overlap with functionality of other packages that have already been submitted to pyOpenSci
- [ ] **Archive** (JOSS only, may be post-review): The repository DOI resolves correctly
- [ ] **Version** (JOSS only, may be post-review): Does the release version given match the GitHub release (v1.0.0)?

---
- [ ] [Initial onboarding survey was filled out ](https://forms.gle/F9mou7S3jhe8DMJ16) 
We appreciate each maintainer of the package filling out this survey individually. :raised_hands: 

> Thank you authors in advance for sending 10 minutes to do this. It truly helps our organization. :raised_hands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thank you authors in advance for setting aside five to ten minutes to do this. It truly helps our organization. :raised_hands:
```

editor to the review. The editor will begin the process of finding reviewers for the package. [Check out the editor guide for more information on this process](editors-guide.md) 

A few final tasks to perform here:

- Add any comments to the bottom of your editor checks comment
- Update the yaml in the header of the issue with the editor assigned to the review 
- Add the tag `2/seeking-reviewer(s)` to the issue.

### Submissions that are incomplete or vague: need more details

In some cases online documentation of a package is sparse, the README is 
minimal or hard to understand or there is no clear documentation setup. Or 
in other cases some of the YAML at the top of the issue is missing. 
This makes assessment of the package's scope much harder. 
In this case, please ask for more information. Even if the package is deemed
out-of-scope, the package documentation will improve as a result of your questions. 

Example text

```markdown
Hello <username> and many thanks for your submission.

We are discussing whether the package is in scope and need a bit more 
information.

Would you mind adding more details and context to your README file?

> After reading it someone with little domain knowledge should understand 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After reading it, someone with little domain knowledge should understand 
```
